[Music]
the cheater might not be the biggest of
the big cats nor the most ferocious but
it is without a doubt the fastest not
only is it capable of astounding top
speed of more than 60 miles an hour but
it can get up to speed
incredibly quickly and with an
acceleration that's comparable to that
of a high-powered sports car they're
able to go from zero to 60 miles an hour
in just three seconds and it's this
incredible acceleration that really
gives them the edge so how do they do it
just what makes them the fastest animal
you'll find on land of course a lot of
it is down to the sheer force of their
muscles short bursts of speed are
usually measured in the power generated
per kilogram of body weight
record-breaking sprinter Usain Bolt
generates around 25 watts of power per
kilo while a greyhound clocks in at
about 60 watts per kilo
but the Cheetahs raw power leaves these
in the dust doubling that of the
Greyhound reaching 120 watts per kilo of
their body weight and that power is put
to good use
the average cheetah weighs just 45 kilos
or so and their long lithe frame with
flattened ribcage small head and skinny
legs is streamlined for zipping through
the long grass inside their bodies their
heart and lungs are oversized and they
have enlarged respiratory tracts to get
as much oxygen in and around the body as
fast as possible to supply their
powerful muscles during run a cheetah
will take up to 150 breaths a minute and
still it can take them up to 30 minutes
to recover from a chase but the real
secret behind their success is this
skeleton they've got long legs that help
by acting as levers turning each
powerful muscle contraction into a
massive extension just like the long
swing of a golf club from the flick of a
wrist and the thing that really sets
them apart from other runners is that
incredible curve in their spine the
cheetah spine is more flexible because
the joints between their vertebrae are
only loosely articulated allowing them
to move further this means that the spy
can be flexed up first and then down to
increase the length and power of their
stride when sprinting a cheetah uses a
galloping gait similar to a horse or a
greyhound top speed but the curve in
their spine means that the back legs can
hit the ground ahead of where the front
legs hit effectively gaining extra
distance and loading the body like a
spring ready to explode forwards with
this special skeleton and the power in
their legs a 1.5 meter long cheetah a
third of which is tail can cover over 7
meters in a single stride a chase rarely
stays in a straight line though and
that's where that extraordinarily long
tail comes in the power in the muscles
and the super flexible spine that allow
a cheetah to accelerate also help it to
change direction pretty quickly - but
the reaction forces on the animal's body
when turning risk knocking them out of
the race and the faster you go the
harder it is to turn imagine a motorbike
trying to turn a sharp corner at 60
miles an hour chances are it would lose
traction and skid to the outside
at this speed a bike can just about
manage a 45 degree turn a cheetah can
pivot 50 degrees on a dime their long
tail might seem to fail and controllably
when the animal dodges from side to side
but in fact is tracing an intricate path
to counterbalance the centrifugal forces
that could ruin their chase and their
day and if that's not enough cheetah
claws don't retract all the way meaning
they're always sticking out a bit giving
them extra purchase on the dusty ground
of the Savannah to avoid skidding on a
turf so with claws tail spine gait heart
lungs perfectly tuned to make a cheetah
the ultimate lean speed machine there's
little wonder that it's among the most
successful hunters in all of Africa if
you enjoyed this video give us a like
and subscribe and let us know if you've
got any animal questions racing around
in your head in the comments below see
you next time